Kevin
Cotellesso
Hello! I’m a senior Mechanical
Engineering major with minors in
robotics and artificial intelligence
(AI) at Rose-Hulman Institute of
Technology (RHIT).

I have been designing,
programming and building
solutions to everyday problems
for 10 years. I also developed my
problem solving and teamwork
skills building and programming
robots for 12 years as a FIRST
team member.

When I’m not studying, you’ll find
me leading the RHIT MATE
underwater robotics team where
I indulge my passion of designing
and improving compliant
mechanisms and
elecromechanical systems;
enjoying the great outdoors on
my mountain bike; or at the piano
laying my heart bare in a musical
composition.

This document presents some of
my research and several of the
innovative solutions I’ve created
for various problems. I hope you
enjoy reading it!




     (623) 236-5618                    cotellkp@rose-hulman.edu
JAW-BASED HUMAN-MACHINE
INTERFACES
Over the course of ten weeks, I authored a comprehensive literature review on
the state of the art in human machine interfaces (HMI) that don’t require use of
the hands, identifying jaw-based HMI as an unexplored research area.




                         Academic Research - 2025
MICROEXTRUSION SHAPE
OPTIMIZATION
For my final project in Dr. Dan Stoecklein’s Design Optimization elective, I
contributed to his work developing a design tool for microextrusion die shapes.
I started with his tool that quickly calculates the final shape of a microextrusion
given a die shape, then formulated it as a 10-D standard optimization problem.
Then, I compared the performance, number of evaluations, and wall time of
several common optimization algorithms.


                                                     Original Problem: Each
                                                   optimization algorithm was
                                                asked to maximize the similarity
                                                of an output image to a specified
                                                 target shape. Initial conditions
                                                  were either a circular die or a
                                                slightly perturbed version of the
                                                          “solution” die.



                                                  Nelder-Mead: Performed the
                                                   best of all three algorithms,
                                                    finding satisfactory visual
                                                 matches and high similarity with
                                                  only ~500 function iterations.




                                                   Particle Swarm Optimization:
                                                     Used 3000-4000 function
                                                  evaluations, but was able to find
                                                    highly performant solutions.




                                                 Steepest Descent: Achieved the
                                                 highest similarity score in most
                                                  cases, but required upwards of
                                                 7000 function evaluations to do
                                                                so.




                           Academic Research - 2025
MODELING DIFFUSION IN
A MICROFLUIDIC SYSTEM
Researchers Mehmet Akif ŞAHİN and Ghulam Destgeer from Technical University
of Munich are modeling the effects of acoustic streaming on low reynolds
number flows of multiple adjacent fluids. I worked with Rose-Hulman’s Dr. Dan
Stoecklein to incorporate diffusion effects into their model, to determine
whether diffusion plays an important role in the output shape of the channel.




                                                                         Inlet




                                                                           Concentration
                                                                             (mol/m³)
     Inlet




             A diagram showing an example simulation output. Red and blue represent
             two separate fluids, and the green plane shows how the interface between
                            the two is shaped by the acoustic streaming.



We determined that diffusion qualitatively affected the output shape of the
simulation, and reduced one of the discrepancies observed between simulation
and experimental results.




                          Academic Research - 2024-2025
ARTICULATED
COMPLIANT GRIPPER
The MATE ROV Competition is an underwater
robotics competition where a remotely
operated submersible must measure and
manipulate objects 15' below the surface of
the water. I have been on Rose-Hulman’s team
for four years.
My first two years on the team, I designed a
durable, performant, and easy-to-
manufacture compliant gripper system.
The gripper is cable-actuated; a servo
winch pulls a bicycle shifter cable, which
runs through a wrist joint along the axis of
rotation and pulls the gripper closed via a
bearing. This allows for unlimited rotation
of the gripper in either direction.
Its three-finger design can grasp objects of
various sizes, and its compliant fingers
distribute gripping force, allowing it to handle
delicate objects (Red Solo Cup?) without
damaging them. During our competition, we
successfully manipulated all underwater
game elements using this gripper.




                              Robotic Design - 2024
COMPLIANT GRIPPER
FINGER DESIGN
MATE Compliant Finger Design: Continuous Motion Estimation
I designed the fingers of the MATE Compliant Gripper in SOLIDWORKS by
modeling their shape wrapped around a circular object, and then
unwrapping that shape. This results in geometry that naturally curls
around objects when it grabs them, distributing the gripping force.




Rigid Mechanism Estimation
I implemented an alternate design methodology for compliant mechanisms
that mimic rigid-body mechanisms. This approach involves replacing rigid
linkages with thick sections and joints with thin “hinge” areas. This methodology
is well suited for replacing sprung rigid mechanisms, since the material’s
deformation acts as a spring pushing it back to its manufactured position.




 Relevant Skills:
    3D Printing - Developed slicer settings to print flexible filament with minimal
    stringing and blobbing
    Mechanism Design - Used 2D kinematics to design and estimate the motion
    of continuously deformable mechanisms
    Rapid Prototyping and Development




                             Robotic Design - 2024
SHADE SHIFTER
Problem: When driving west when the sun is setting,
the intensity of the sun is a hazard to drivers. If the
sun is low enough in the sky, it is impossible to block
it with a sun visor without obscuring much of the
driver’s view.

Solution: I designed and built an
automatic sun-blocking robot! It detects
bright lights using a webcam, and uses
two winches to move a hanging blocker
between the light and the driver.

Specs:
   0.8m square 2-axis gantry powered
   by two Lego EV3 servomotors
   OpenCV/Python code uses
   webcam video to detect light

  How does it work?
  The Shade Shifter uses a Logitech webcam to detect the location of a bright
  light. It then calculates where the shade needs to be placed to block light from
  hitting the driver’s eyes.
  The shade is suspended in the frame with fishing line that is connected to two
  winches at the frame corners; the (x,y) position of the shade is controlled
  precisely by spooling the two winches in and out.




 Relevant Skills:
    Socket Communication - Computer vision code on Linux laptop sent (x,y)
    coordinates to control code on Lego EV3.
    Computer vision - Detected bright areas, calculated XY position
    Inverse Kinematics - Calculated string length for a given XY position
    Controls - Implemented proportional position feedback control in Python



                             Everyday Solutions - 2022
THE WRENCH
WHISPERER
Problem: My high school FIRST Robotics Competition Team had bins
of unsorted allen wrenches that we had to sort through each time
we needed an allen wrench.
Solution: I designed, built
and programmed an
automatic wrench measurer
that quickly differentiates
allen wrench sizes.
Specs:
   0.1mm accuracy
   <0.5s measure time
   0.5mm min wrench size


                                       How does it work?
                                       The Wrench Whisperer uses computer
                                       vision techniques to precisely measure
                                       the size of an allen wrench placed on the
                                       light box. The secret is in the precision of
                                       the environment; the light box produces
                                       a perfect silhouette, and camera
                                       exposure settings are fixed to ensure
                                       consistent measurements. Once
                                       precision is obtained, accuracy is just a
                                       calibration curve away.



Relevant Skills:
   Sensor calibration techniques - achieved 0.1mm precision with HD webcam
   using precise construction and a lookup table
   Computer vision - Standardized exposure, cropped, blurred, thresholded,
   detected contours, measured areas, detected orientation of input image
   using OpenCV and Python
   Frame design - ... out of Legos! But was precise and rigid enough to transport
   and consistently measure 0.1mm accuracy
   Iterative design - Evaluated and redesigned, used Git for version control




                        Solving Everyday Problems - 2021
SELF LEVELING
SOUP BOWL
Problem: When my family travels, we often
eat meals in the car. During one one trip, the
car accelerated, and I spilled my soup...

Solution: I designed and built a 2-axis gimbal
mounted bowl that automatically tilts to keep
liquids from spilling when it is moved.
Specs:
   2X digital servos
   On-axis linkage for inner gimbal
   Arduino 101 with 6-axis IMU to detect local
   acceleration                                           I used FreeCAD to design
   Runs on NiMH battery pack                             all 3D printed components.


                                            How does it work?
                                            The “Tilt-A-Bowl” uses its onboard 3-
                                            axis accelerometer to determine the
                                            direction of local acceleration. When
                                            stationary, this acceleration points
                                            down (gravity), but when accelerating
                                            sideways, it will have horizontal
                                            components. The Tilt-A-Bowl uses its 2-
                                            axis gimbal to keep its surface
                                            perpendicular to local acceleration, so
                                            that anything on its surface "feels” only
                                            downward acceleration.

          Look Mom, No spills!!

 Trigonometry is used to
 convert local acceleration
 direction into servo angles.


 Relevant Skills:
    C++/Arduino - Programmed from scratch using Arduino 101 IMU library
    Design for Assembly - All screw holes are accessible without disassembly.
    Correct tolerances were included for minimal postprocessing.
    Design for Manufacturing - Entire system was designed in FreeCAD to be 3D
    printed with minimal support material.
    Filtering - Noisy IMU data was filtered with a moving average to smooth
    response.


                             Everyday Solutions - 2019
DIGITAL TO ANALOG
AIR COMPRESSOR
CONVERSION
Problem: The digital controller on my family’s air
compressor failed rendering the air compressor useless.
Solution: I replaced the digital control components with
analog components and created ed a support for them.
Seven years later, it still works perfectly.




Relevent skills:
   CAD Modeling - Designed supports for analog components using FreeCAD
   Systems Integration - Sourced and integrated pressure switch, regulator,
   tank pressure gauge and manifold into existing air compressor




                       Solving Everyday Problems - 2018
 AUTOMATIC
 CHICKEN DOOR
Problem: I grew up on a mini-farm where my
family raised chickens. It was my job to release
the chickens every morning and pen them up in
the evenings. This task was boring and menial.

Solution: I built and programmed an automatic
chicken door that opened and closed in
response to ambient light intensity. It can be
installed in between the studs of a chicken
coop and let chickens in an out in the daytime,
while keeping them safe at night.

Specs:
   550 12V brushed DC motor with 30A
   brushed motor controller                          12yo. me and my automatic
   4:1 planetary gearbox                                    chicken door.
   Threaded rod and brass insert nut motion
   system
   Drawer slide allows vertical motion while
   resisting impacts to the door
   Photoresistor to detect ambient light levels
   Roller switches to detect whether door is up
   or down

How does it work?
In the morning, when it is bright enough
outside, the photoresistor detects the change
and an Arduino microcontroller commands the
motor to start lifting the door. When the door is
all the way up, a limit switch is pressed, telling
the Arduino to stop the motor.
The opposite process occurs when light levels
drop below a certain amount at night.


 Relevant Skills:
    C++/Arduino - Programmed state machine on Arduino Uno
    Motor and Gearbox Selection - I learned the hard way that a 550 motor by
    itself doesn’t have much torque...




                      Solving Everyday Problems - 2016
